---
title: The Mathematics of Tuning Systems
author: u1hcw9nx
created_at: 2026-01-31T09:04:08.000Z
url: https://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/tuning_talk/
points: 23
hn_url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=46834810
comments: 4
---

## Article

Leibniz said "Music is the pleasure the human mind experiences from counting
without being aware that it is counting." The first step is choosing a tuning
system — the frequency ratios between pitches in a scale. Different kinds of
music sound best in different tuning systems! In music from the Middle Ages
until today, new musical styles have gone hand in hand with mathematical
innovations in tuning systems. Here I will focus on a few of the most important
and beautiful Western systems, from Pythagorean tuning to today's reigning
champion: equal temperament. Can you hear the difference? What will come
next?You read a version of my talk with my spoken remarks between the slides,
below! You can also see the slides of my talk. And you can also read a
preliminary version of a book I'm writing on this topic. If you look at a piano
keyboard you'll see groups of 2 black notes alternating with groups of 3. So the
pattern repeats after 5 black notes, but if you count you'll see there are also
7 white notes in this repetitive pattern. So: the pattern repeats each 12 notes.
Some people who never play the piano claim it would be easier if had all white
keys, or simply white alternating with black. But in fact the pattern makes it
easier to keep track of where you are — and it's not arbitrary, it's musically
significant. For one thing white notes give a 7-note scale all their own. Most
very simple songs use only this scale! The black notes also form a useful scale.
And the white and black notes together form a 12-tone scale. Starting at any
note and going up 12 notes, we reach a note whose frequency is almost exactly
double the one we started with. Other spacings correspond to other frequency
ratios. I don't want to overwhelm you with numbers. So I'm only showing you a
few of the simplest and most important ratios. These are really worth
remembering. We give the notes letter names. This goes back at least to
Boethius, the guy famous for writing The Consolations of Philosophy before he
was tortured and killed at the order of Theodoric the Great. (Yeah, "Great".)
Boethius was a counselor to Theodoric, but he really would have done better to
stay out of politics — he was quite good at math and music theory. Boethius may
be the reason the lowest note on the piano is called A. We now repeat the names
of the white notes as shown in the picture: seven white notes A,B,C,D,E,F,G and
then it repeats. So the scale used to start at A, using only white notes. But
due to the irregular spacing of white notes, a scale of all white notes sounds
different depending on where you start. Starting at A gives you the 'minor
scale', which sounds kinda sad. Now we often start at C, since that gives us the
scale most people like best: the 'major' scale. (Good musicians start wherever
they want, and get different sounds that way. But 'C major' is like the vanilla
ice cream of scales — now. It wasn't always this way.) From the late 1100s to
about 1600 people called pitches that lie outside 7-tone system "musica ficta":
"false" or "fictitious" notes. But gradually these notes — the black keys on the
piano when you're playing in C major — became more accepted. To keep things
simple for mathematicians, I'll usually denote these with the "flat" symbol, ♭.
For example, G♭ is the black note one down from the white note G. (Musicians
really need both flats and sharps, and they'd also call G♭ something else: F♯.
I'll actually need both G♭ and F♯ at some points in this talk!) Since starting
the scale with the letter C takes a little practice, I'll do it a different way
that mathematicians may like better. I'll start with 1 and count up. Musicians
put little hats on these numbers, and I'll do that. For example, we'll call the
fifth white note up the scale the 'fifth' and write it as \(\hat{5}\). Now for
the math of tuning systems! The big question is: how do we choose the frequency
of each note? This is literally how many times per second the air vibrates, when
we play that note. Since 1850, by far the most common method for tuning
keyboards has been "12-tone equal temperament". Here we divide each octave into
12 equal parts. What do I mean by this, exactly? I mean that each note on the
piano produces a sound that vibrates faster than the note directly below it by a
factor of the 12th root of 2. But we can contemplate 'N-tone equal temperament'
for N = 1, 2, 3, .... And some people do use these other tuning systems! Here's
a picture of the most popular modern tuning system: 12-tone equal temperament.
As we march around clockwise, each note has a frequency of \(2^{1/12}\) times
the note directly before it. When we go all the way around the circle, we've
gone up an octave. That is, we've reached a frequency that's twice the one we
started with. But a note that's an octave higher sounds 'the same, only higher'.
So in a funny way we're back where we started. But now for a big question: why
do we use a scale with 12 notes? To start answering, notice that we actually use
three scales: one with 5 notes (the black keys), one with 7 (the white keys) and
one with 12 (all the keys). As mathematicians we can detect a highly nonobvious
pattern here. What's so good about scales with 5, 7 or 12 notes? A crucial clue
seems to be the 'fifth'. If you go up to the fifth white note here, its
frequency is about 3/2 times the first. This is one of the simplest fractions,
and it sounds incredibly simple and pure. So it's important. It's a dominant
force in western music. We can make a chart to see how close an approximation to
the fraction 3/2 we get in a scale with N equally spaced notes. N = 5 does
better than any scale with fewer notes! N = 7 does better than any scale with
fewer notes! N = 12 does better than any scale with fewer notes! And it does
much better. To beat it, we have to go all the way up to N = 29 — and even that
is only slightly better. Here's a chart of how close we can get to a frequency
ratio of 3/2 using N-tone equal temperament. See how great 12-tone equal
temperament is? There are also some neat patterns. See the stripes of even
numbers and stripes of odd numbers? That's not a coincidence. For more charts
like this, and much more cool stuff along these lines, go here. Here's the 'star
of fifths' in 12-tone equal temperament! 12-tone equal temperament is most
popular tuning system since maybe 1810, or definitely by 1850. But it's
mathematically the most boring of the tuning systems that have dominated Western
music since the Middle Ages. Now let's go back much earlier, to Pythagorean
tuning. When you chop the octave into 12 equal parts, the frequency ratios of
all your notes are irrational numbers... except when you go up or down some
number of octaves. The Pythagoreans disliked irrational numbers. People even say
they drowned Hippasus at sea after he proved that the square root of 2 is
irrational! That's just a myth, but it illustrates how people connected
Pythagoras to a love of rational numbers. In Pythagorean tuning, people wanted a
lot of frequency ratios of 3/2. In equal temperament, where we chop the octave
into 12 equal parts, when we start at any note and go up 7 of these parts (a so-
called 'fifth'), we reach a note that vibrates about 1.4981 times as fast.
That's close enough to 3/2 for most ears. But it's not the Pythagorean ideal! As
we'll see, seeking the Pythagorean ideal causes trouble. It will unleash the
devil in music. Start at some note and keep multiplying the frequency by 3/2,
like a good Pythagorean. After doing this 12 times, you reach a note that's
close to 7 octaves higher. But not exactly, since the 12th power of 3/2 is
129.746338 which is a bit more than 27 = 128 The ratio of these two is called
the 'Pythagorean comma': p = (3/2)12 / 27 = 312 / 219 ≈ 1.0136 This is like an
unavoidable lump in the carpet when you use Pythagorean tuning. It's good to
stick the lump in your carpet under your couch. And it's good to stick the
Pythagorean comma near the so-called 'tritone' — a very dissonant note that
you'd tend to avoid in medieval music. This note is halfway around the circle of
fifths. In Pythagorean tuning, going 6 steps clockwise around the circle of
fifths doesn't give you the same note as going 6 steps counterclockwise! We call
one of them ♭5 and the other ♯4. Their frequency ratio is the Pythagorean comma!
In equal temperament, the tritone is exactly halfway up the octave: 6 notes up.
Since going up an octave doubles the frequency, going up a tritone multiplies
the frequency by √2. It's no coincidence that this is the irrational number that
got Hippasus in trouble. In Pythagorean tuning, going 6 steps up the scale
doesn't match jumping up an octave and then going 6 steps down. We call one of
them ♭5 and the other ♯4. They're both decent approximations to √2, built from
powers of 2 and 3. Their frequency ratio is the Pythagorean comma! The tritone
is sometimes called 'diabolus in musica' — the devil in music. Some say this
interval was actually banned by the Catholic church! But that's another myth. It
could have gotten its name because it sounds so dissonant — but mathematically,
the 'devil' here is that the square root of 2 is irrational. If we're trying to
use only numbers built from powers of 2 and 3, we have to arbitrarily choose one
to approximate √2. In Pythagorean tuning we can choose either 1024/729 ≈ 1.4047
called the sharped fourth, ♯4, or 729/512 ≈ 1.4238 called the flatted fifth, ♭5,
to be our tritone. In this chart I've chosen the ♭5. No matter which you choose,
one of the fifths in the circle of fifths will be noticeably smaller than the
rest. It's called the 'wolf fiffth' because it howls like a wolf. You can hear a
wolf fifth here. If you're playing medieval music, you can easily avoid the wolf
fifth: just don't play one of the two fifths that contains the tritone! A more
practical problem concerns the 'third': the third white note in the scale.
Ideally this vibrates 5/4 as fast as the first. But in Pythagorean tuning it
vibrates 81/64 times as fast. That's annoyingly high! Sure, 81/64 is a rational
number. But it's not the really simple rational number our ears are hoping for
when we hear a third. You can compare a Pythagorean third to a third of 5/4
here. Indeed, Pythagorean tuning punishes the ear with some very complicated
fractions. The first, fourth, fifth and octave are great. But the rest of the
notes are not. There's no way that 243/128 sounds better than an irrational
number! In the 1300s, when thirds were becoming more important in music,
theorists embraced a beautiful solution to this problem, called 'just
intonation'. Now let's talk about that. It's an amazing fact that in western
composed music, harmony became important only around 1200 AD, when Perotin
expanded the brand new use of two-part harmony to four-part harmony. This put
pressure on musicians to use a new tuning system — or rather, to revive an old
tuning system. It's often called 'just intonation' (though experts will find
that vague). We can get using a cool trick, though I doubt this is how it was
originally discovered. First, draw a hexagonal grid of notes. Put a note with
frequency 1 in the middle. Label the other notes by saying that moving one step
to the right multiplies the frequency of your note by 3/2, while going up and to
the right multiplies it by 5/4. Next, cut out a portion of the grid to use for
our scale. We use this particular parallelogram — you'll soon see what's so
great about it. Now, multiply each number in our parallelogram by whatever power
of 2 it takes to get a number between 1 and 2. We do this because we want
frequencies that lie within an octave, to be notes in a scale. Remember: if 1 is
the note we started with, 2 is the note an octave up. Now we want to curl up our
parallelogram to get a torus. If we do this, gluing together opposite edges,
there will be exactly 12 numbers on our torus — just right for a scale! This is
a remarkable coincidence. There's a problem: the numbers at the corners are not
all equal. But they're pretty close! And they're close to √2: the frequency of
the tritone, the 'devil in music'. 25/18 = 1.3888... 45/32 = 1.40625 64/45 =
1.4222... 36/25 = 1.44 So we'll just pick one. When we curl up our parallelogram
to get a torus, there's also another problem. The numbers along the left edge
aren't equal to the corresponding numbers at the right edge. But they're close!
Each number at right is 81/80 times the corresponding number at left. I've drawn
red lines connecting them. So, we just choose one from each of these 4 pairs.
We've already picked one number for all the corners, so we just need to do this
for the remaining 2 pairs. So, here are the various choices for notes in our
scale! For the tritone we have 4 choices. That's okay because this note sucks
anyway. That is: in Western music from the 1300s, it was considered very
dissonant. So there's no obviously best choice of how it should sound. For the 2
we have two choices, and for the ♭7 we also have 2 choices. So there's a total
of 16 possible scales here. Regardless of how we make our choices, we'll get
really nice simple fractions for the 1, ♭3, 3, 4, 5 ,♭6, 6, and 8. And that
makes this approach, called 'just intonation', really great! (If you like math:
notice the 'up-down symmetry' in this whole setup. For example the minor second
is 16/15, but the reciprocal of that is 15/16, which is the seventh... at least
after we double it to get a number between 1 and 2, getting 15/8.) Here's a
chart of all possible just intonation scales: start at the top and take any
route you want to the bottom. There are 16 possible routes. A single step
between notes in a 12-tone scale is called a 'semitone', since most white notes
are two steps apart. In just intonation the semitones come in 4 different sizes,
which is kind of annoying. Notice that if we choose our route cleverly, we can
completely avoid the large diatonic semitone. Or, we can avoid the greater
chromatic semitone. But we can't avoid both. So, we can get a scale with just 3
sizes of semitone, but not fewer. How should we choose??? This is the most
commonly used form of just intonation, I think. It has a few nice features: 1)
It has up-down symmetry except right next to the tritone in the middle, where
this symmetry is impossible. 2) It uses 9/8 for the second rather than 10/9,
which is a bit nicer: a simpler fraction. 3) It completely avoids the large
diatonic semitone, which is the largest possible semitone. These don't single
out this one scale. I'd like to find some nice features that only this one of
the 16 possibilities has. But let's see what this scale looks like on the
keyboard! Here's the most common scale in just intonation! The white notes are
perhaps the most important here, since those give the 'major scale'. The
fractions here are beautifully simple. Well, okay: the second (9/8) and seventh
(15/8) are not so simple. But that's to be expected, since these notes are the
most dissonant! Of these, the seventh was more important in the music of the
1300s, and even today. It's called the 'leading-tone', because we often play it
right near the end of a piece of music, or a passage within a piece of music,
and its dissonance leads us up to the octave, with a tremendous sense of relief.
Here's the really great thing about the white notes in just intonation. They
form three groups, each with frequencies in the ratios 1 : 5/4 : 3/2 or in other
words, 4 : 5 : 6 This pattern is called a 'major triad' and it's absolutely
fundamental to music — perhaps not so much in the 1300s, but certainly as music
unfolded later. Major triads became the bread and butter of music, and still
are. The fact that every white note — that is, every note in the 7-note 'major
scale' — lies in a mathematically perfect major triad is a gigantic feature in
favor of just intonation. Listen to the difference between some simple chords in
just intonation and in equal temperament. You probably won't hate equal
temperament, but you can hear the difference. Equal temperament vibrates as the
notes drift in and out of phase. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AcCkn0p7HDE But
let's take a final peek at the dark underbelly of just intonation: the tritone.
As I mentioned, there are four choices of tritone in just intonation. You can
divide them into two pairs that are separated by a ratio of 81/80, or two pairs
separated by a ratio of 128/125. These numbers are fundamental glitches in the
fabric of music. They have names! People have been thinking about them at least
since Boethius around 500 AD, but probably earlier. • The 'syntonic comma',
81/80, is all about trying to approximate a power of 3 by products of 2's and
5's. • The 'lesser diesis', 128/125, is all about trying to approximate powers
of 2 by powers of 5. If these numbers were 1, music would be beautiful in a very
simple way. But reality cannot be wished away. And as we'll see, these numbers
are lurking in the spacing between notes in just intonation — not just near the
tritone, but everywhere! Look! The four kinds of semitone in just intonation are
related by the lesser diesis and syntonic comma! In this chart, adding vectors
corresponds to multiplying numbers. For example, the green arrow followed by the
red one gives the dark blue one, so 25/24 × 81/80 = 135/138 Or in music
terminology: the lesser chromatic semitone times the syntonic comma is the
greater chromatic semitone. And so on. The parallelogram here is secretly
related to the parallelogram we curled up to get the just intonation scale.
Think about it! Music holds many mysteries. Just intonation is great if you're
playing in just one 'key', always ending each passage with the note I've been
calling 1. But when people started trying to 'change keys', musicians were
pressed into other tuning systems. It's sad in a way that this historical
development winds up with equal temperament: the most boring of all the systems,
which is equally good, and thus equally bad, in every key. But the history of
music is not done, and computers make it vastly easier than ever before to
explore tuning systems. What will come next? It's up to us. To explore more of
the mathematics of tuning systems, you can read some of my more detailed
articles about it:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Comments

kensai: When you think the article is ending, you get more links for further
indulging! Thanks.

aa-jv: A very nicely written and detailed article, with many details I have not
personally learned of, in my own music technology hacking so far .. if anyone
else is interested in writing software for musical tuning systems, both
Xenharmlib and PyTuning are very extensive libraries for the job .. Xenharmlib
for C++ and PyTuning for python. Xenharmlib has deep support for intervals,
chords, scales, non-standard notations, and advanced topics like non-Western
harmonics, diatonic set theory, and non-octave-repeating systems and also allows
for the mathematical manipulation of ratios and structures (harmonic
exploration). PyTuning allows for generating scales from ratios/cents, EDO, just
intonation, and custom temperaments and facilitates calculations such as
frequency ratios, comma approximations, and temperament comparisons, aligning
with the article's derivations and trade-off discussions at a similar depth. I
hope to see more math of music articles in the future .. its a fascinating
subject indeed!

uwagar: As we'll see, seeking the Pythagorean ideal causes trouble. It will
unleash the devil in music. ^^ from the article. this kind of thing bothers me.
what is the devil? for whom is it the devil? music doesnt havent to be
"christian" to "sound good".

giraffe_lady: Very cool explanation. Something I've come across a few times on
here was wanting to explain how 12tet "includes" or handles approximations of
intervals from other scales, and how that affects the musical choices of
musicians. But it's impossible to explain without getting into like, what is
even the problem solved by tuning systems. Without the intuition that comes from
making music, programmers and engineers see the fractions & obvious series and
get too fixated on finding the "perfect" system. When these are much more
physical tools, created over time to make certain processes easier. Tuning
systems are more like a woodworker's knives than like the unit circle: being
perfect does not make them better tools for creation if they are already fit
enough.
